GNU Coreutils is a package of essential command-line tools for Unix-like operating systems. These tools perform basic file, shell, and text operations and are integral to scripting and system administration. Mastering Coreutils enhances productivity and provides a deeper understanding of system internals.

Below is a detailed explanation of 20 core utilities with usage examples and common options.

      ls — List Directory Contents  
      Lists files and directories in the current directory or given path. It's one of the most frequently used commands to inspect file structures.  
      Common Options:  
      ls -l: Long listing format showing permissions, size, and timestamps.  
      ls -a: Includes hidden files (those starting with a dot).  
      ls -lh: Human-readable file sizes like 1K, 2M.  
      ls -lt: Sorts files by modification time.

      cp file1 file2: Copies file1 to file2.  
      cp -r dir1 dir2: Recursively copy contents of dir1 to dir2.  
      cp -u: Copy only when the source file is newer.  
      cp -p: Preserve file mode, ownership, and timestamps.

mv — Move or Rename Files
Moves files and directories or renames them. It overwrites destination files without warning unless used with options.
Common Options:

mv old.txt new.txt: Renames the file.

mv file.txt /tmp/: Moves file to /tmp.

mv -i: Prompt before overwriting existing files.

      rm — Remove Files or Directories  
      Deletes files or directories permanently. There’s no undo, so caution is needed.  
      Common Options:        
      rm file.txt: Removes a file.  
      rm -r folder/: Recursively removes directory.  
      rm -f: Forces deletion without prompt.  
      rm -rf /: Dangerous! Deletes everything recursively without warning.

      touch — Create or Update Files  
      Updates file timestamps or creates empty files. Useful in scripting and testing.  
      Common Options:      
      touch new.txt: Creates a file if it doesn’t exist.  
      touch -c file.txt: Updates timestamp only if the file exists.

      cat — Concatenate and Display Files  
      Displays the content of files, often used with redirection and piping.  
      Common Options:       
      cat file.txt: Prints file content.  
      cat file1 file2 > merged.txt: Concatenates files.  
      cat -n file.txt: Number all output lines.

echo — Print Text to Terminal
Used to display lines of text or variables. Commonly used in scripts.
Common Options:

echo "Hello World": Prints message.

echo $USER: Displays the value of the USER environment variable.

echo -e "Line1\nLine2": Enables interpretation of backslash escapes.

pwd — Print Working Directory
Shows the absolute path of the current directory. Helpful in scripts to track locations.
Example:

pwd: Might output /home/haritha/code

cd — Change Directory (Shell Built-in)
Navigates between directories in the filesystem.
Examples:

cd /etc: Moves to the /etc directory.

cd ~: Moves to your home directory.

cd -: Switches to the previous directory.

chmod — Change File Permissions
Modifies who can read, write, or execute a file.
Examples:

chmod +x script.sh: Makes a script executable.

chmod 755 myapp: Gives full permissions to the owner, read/execute to others.

chown — Change Ownership
Changes file/directory ownership to another user or group.
Examples:

chown root file.txt: Changes ownership to root.

chown user:group dir/: Changes owner and group.

head — Show First Lines
Prints the beginning of a file (default is 10 lines).
Examples:

head /var/log/syslog: See top of a log file.

head -n 5 file.txt: Display first 5 lines.

tail — Show Last Lines
Prints the end of a file. With -f, it can track real-time updates.
Examples:

tail -n 20 file.txt: Shows last 20 lines.

tail -f /var/log/syslog: Live follow a log file.

du — Estimate File Space Usage
Summarizes disk usage of files and directories.
Common Options:

du -sh folder/: Show human-readable size.

du -ah .: Shows sizes of all files in current directory.

df — Disk Space Usage
Reports filesystem disk space usage.
Common Options:

df -h: Human-readable display.

df /: Check space for root filesystem.

sort — Sort Lines of Text
Organizes lines of text alphabetically or numerically.
Examples:

sort names.txt: Alphabetical sort.

sort -n values.txt: Sort numerically.

sort -r: Reverse sort.

uniq — Filter Duplicate Lines
Filters out adjacent duplicate lines in a file (must be sorted first).
Examples:

uniq sorted.txt: Remove duplicates.

sort names.txt | uniq -c: Count unique entries.

wc — Word/Line/Byte Count
Counts the number of lines, words, and bytes in a file.
Examples:

wc file.txt: All counts.

wc -l: Lines only.

wc -w: Word count.

cut — Extract Fields from Lines
Extracts columns or fields based on delimiters.
Examples:

cut -d':' -f1 /etc/passwd: Shows usernames.

cut -c1-10 file.txt: First 10 characters of each line.

date — Display or Set Date/Time
Prints or sets the system date and time.
Examples:

date: Current date and time.

date -d 'yesterday': View past date.

date +%Y-%m-%d: Custom format output.

Summary
These 20 GNU Coreutils tools form the foundation of shell scripting and system management. Mastery of these commands significantly enhances productivity, especially when automating tasks or debugging issues on Linux/Unix systems.
